Local officials to lobby for bases
May 26, 2005
Atlanta Journal-Constitution, The (GA)
Author: ADD SEYMOUR JR.
Page: JI1
Section: Clayton / Henry
357 Words

Local officials are preparing to lobby members of the federal Base Realignment and Closure Commission, who are expected in Atlanta next month.

Commission members will be in town June 30 to hear the pitch to keep Fort Gillem open.

"Everyone's pretty much got one shot at it," said Forest Park Mayor Chuck Hall. "After that, it's up to the commission."

Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld recommends that Fort Gillem in northeastern Clayton County, Fort McPherson in East Point, the Naval Air Station in Cobb County and the Naval Supply Corps School in Athens be closed. They are among the 33 major military facilities nationwide that may be shut down as part of the 2005 BRAC process.

Defense officials are hoping to streamline the number of military bases around the country as they reorganize the nation's military. Four other BRAC rounds -- 1998, 1995, 1993 and 1991 -- closed 97 bases.

This year's BRAC round would close Fort Gillem, with six Army groups now at the base moving to other bases around the Southeast. The Georgia Army National Guard would get a new home at the old base. A few existing active Army units would remain, as would a new, state-of-the-art, forensic crime investigation laboratory that will serve the entire Defense Department.

Georgia's congressional delegation has already begun lobbying commission members, who will decide over the next three months whether there will be any changes in the recommended list.

Clayton County and other affected communities will rally to keep their local bases open. Army officials estimate that 1,824 jobs -- 737 of those indirectly related to Fort Gillem -- would be lost, but closing the base would save the Defense Department $421.5 million over the next 20 years.

"There's a $671 million economic impact that's generated with Fort Gillem," said U.S. Rep. David Scott (D-Ga.). "That's what it means to us, so we will be prepared to tell the story."

Hall estimated a base on the BRAC list has only a 15 percent chance of getting off.

Lobbying efforts in the past have saved one Georgia base -- Moody Air Force in Valdosta when it was initially on BRAC's list in 1991.