Pentagon plan spares most Crane jobs, adds thousands of workers in Lawrence
May 13, 2005
Indianapolis Business Journal (IN)
Author: IBJ staff report
Page: 4
Section: Stories
863 Words

Gov. Mitch Daniels expressed relief this morning that the Pentagon plans to keep open the Naval Surface Warfare Center at Crane, which had been considered at risk for closing, and add 3,500 jobs at Lawrence's massive Defense Finance and Accounting Service.

"This isn't a dodged bullet," he said. "It's a mortar shell."

The proposed Base Realignment and Closure list didn't completely spare Crane, which is slated to lose 672 of its approximately 4,000 jobs.

Overall, Indiana would see a net gain of nearly 2,200 jobs when work is moved to Fort Benjamin Harrison in Lawrence and other bases in the state.

The 2005 BRAC report lists six Indiana installations targeted for closure, three that would lose workers and two that would gain.

"On balance, today's announcement form the military is good news for Indiana," said Sen. Evan Bayh, a Democrat, in a press release.

The largest gain for the state would be in Lawrence at Fort Benjamin Harrison's Defense Finance and Accounting Service in Indianapolis. The DFAS is responsible for finance and accounting activities within the Department of Defense. The fort's Soldier Support Center was transferred to Jackson, S.C., as a result of the 1991 BRAC process.

The other gain for the state would be for Fort Wayne International Airport Air Guard Station, which is slated to add 256 civilian jobs and 57 military positions.

City officials are pleased the Army's finance center would gain jobs under the proposal, said Melina Maniatis Kennedy, a Democrat and deputy mayor for economic development. But they're also disappointed with the possible changes at Crane because of the facility's potential to boost Indiana's high-tech economy.

As one of the state's installations targeted for reductions, Crane will see the loss of 672 civilian jobs plus 11 contractor positions, according to the BRAC report.

But Daniels, a Republican, chose to emphasize the positive side of the news for Indiana: Crane will be preserved, with its high-tech mission intact. He vowed to continue short-term efforts to lobby on Crane's behalf before BRAC recommendations are final. It's possible, he said, officials might reconsider their decision to cut positions at Crane. And in the long term, he said, every effort will be made to build on the base's cutting-edge engineering capacity and increase its many partnerships with the private sector.

Daniels hadn't always expected BRAC to go so well for Indiana.

"Four months ago, this kind of outcome could not have been anticipated," he said. "We have made every argument we could think of to every person who mattered or might matter."

U.S. Rep. Mike Sodrel, a Republican who represents the Crane area, released a statement promising he'll continue to work with officials to keep the base fully

operational.

"As the specifics of the Pentagon's recommendations for Crane become clearer in the next few hours or even days, I will continue to work, along with my colleagues and the state of Indiana, to see that Crane is treated fairly," said Sodrel, who is in his first term.

Crane workers who lose their jobs might be able to find employment with firms expected to relocate to the new West Gate Crane Technology Park, said Terry Busch, vice president at CB Richard Ellis, which markets the park.

"By and large its good news for the West Gate Technology Park at Crane," Busch said. "The jobs that will remain [at Crane] are the critical high tech jobs and those were exactly the jobs that this park was to support."

Cuts also are slated for the Hulman Regional Airport Air Guard Station in Terre Haute, which would lose 136 jobs.

On the list for closing is the Navy Recruiting district headquarters in Indianapolis. That would result in a loss of 27 military posts, 5 civilian jobs and 6 contracting positions. The Navy Marine Corps Reserve Center at Grissom Air Force Base in Bunker Hill would also close - a loss of seven military jobs.

Other closures include the Newport Chemical Depot, which would eliminate 571 military and civilian jobs; the Navy Reserve Center in Evansville, a loss of seven military jobs; the U.S. Army Reserve Center in Lafayette, a loss of 21 military positions; and the U.S. Army Reserve Center in Seston, a loss of 12 military positions.

The national list of base closures and realignments was shorter than originally anticipated. The changes, if approved, would save the government an estimated $48.8 billion over 20 years.

Although most of the recommendations are expected to be endorsed by the base closing commission, it can under certain circumstances make changes to the list.

The commission has until Sept. 8 to forward its final recommendations to President George Bush, who has until Sept. 23 to either accept them in total or reject them in total. If he rejects them, the commission must submit a revised report to Bush by Oct. 20, and he has until Nov. 20 to act on it.

If Bush approves the recommendations, then Congress must either accept or reject the list in whole.

Indiana has been a net loser in previous BRAC rounds. But regardless how it affects particular states, Daniels said, Americans should support the BRAC process. "We shouldn't spend one dollar less than it takes to secure the defense of Americans," he said. "But we shouldn't spend one dollar more than is required."