A light at the end of the tunnel? the future of fort monroe
May 15, 2005
Virginian-Pilot, The (Norfolk, VA)
Author: JOANNE KIMBERLIN
Page: A1
Section: Front
1005 Words

FORT MONROE - There was good news in the bad news.

After centuries of standing guard, Fort Monroe may fade into history, its 3,500 jobs scattered and its fate uncertain.

But there's a contract, inked ages ago by some unknown, long-forgotten fellow.

It seems that back in the early 1800s, Virginia only loaned the federal government the bulk of the Army fort's 570-acre property. The written agreement says that if the military ever vacates, as it now proposes to do, title to the land comes home to the commonwealth.

Such things aren't always a given, especially now, as the Department of Defense seeks ways to save money in a costly time of war. Many of the land deals that established military bases across the country are a hodgepodge of federal purchases and state give aways. In those cases, the future of the property in this era of base closure and downsizing is up to Defense officials.

That could mean a sale to the highest bidder. In California, surrounding communities wrangled for years over rights to the closed El Toro Marine Corps Air Station. A private developer recently won the place for $1 billion.

"That may be the golden parachute for Fort Monroe," Paul Taibl said, "that some legal entity back in antiquity had the foresight to write a good contract."

Taibl is the director of policy for Business Executives for National Security, a Washington, D.C.-based organization interested in balancing strong defense with efficient government. Its members keep a close eye on base closings. Calls came to Taibl from concerned communities nationwide on Friday after the Pentagon released a list of 33 bases recommended for closing under the base realignment and closure process.

"You guys are lucky in other ways, too," Taibl said of Virginia's only base targeted for closure. "Fort Monroe is a nice chunk of real estate. I just got off the phone with people from Ellsworth, S.D . There's just not that much economic activity there to replace what they might be losing."

Indeed, most agree that Fort Monroe's real estate is now worth untold millions - which could translate into a bright future even without uniforms.

The post juts out like a bent arm into the Chesapeake Bay, within sight of where the Hampton Roads Bridge- Tunnel touches the Peninsula. It's surrounded by the city of Hampton - where leaders plan to fight to keep the base open but hope to take its property within their fold if they fail.

Mayor Ross Kearney said he's talked with Gov. Mark Warner.

"He's promised us that Hampton will be an active participant in whatever happens there," Kearney said.

Richmond is making no other pledges.

"Multiple steps will have to be gone through to see where it ends up," said George Foresman, an assistant to the governor. "The bottom line is, we want to be able to get the property into the most effective reuse as soon as possible."

Hampton's mayor said developers are tracking the BRAC process, and have been knocking on the city's door for several months now.

"Some of the proposals have been so outstanding," Kearney said.

He declined to share any details, saying only that most ideas involved high-end homes or commercial ventures.

"It won't be a flea market," Kearney said. "No Get-n-Go. No Motel 8s."

He said Hampton has formed a commission to consider the options.

The old fort is full of waterfront views, sandy beaches, weathered stone, seasoned wood and red-brick, antebellum homes. First fortified in 1609, the fort's life span covers the entire military history of America. It's listed as a National Historic Landmark.

"That's the top tier in this country," said Kathleen Kilpatrick, director of the state's department of historic resources. "The Army has been an amazing steward of the place. Whatever happens to Fort Monroe, we must continue to take care of this treasure."

Age does have its drawbacks. Upkeep on the old buildings runs the Army about $14 million a year. And any developer would have to deal with preservation guidelines. Such rules, however, do not offer blanket protection against change.

"The law only requires that diligent effort be made to avoid or minimize impact upon historic structures," Kilpatrick explained. "No one wants to see them standing empty. You can't love them to death."

There's still time to firm up any plans. If Fort Monroe stays on BRAC's hit list, the Army can't close it for two more years. It could take up to six years to hand over the keys. Unexploded ordnance and pollutants will have to be removed before the base can be taken out of service. Estimated cost for the clean up is $27 million.

Land can be turned over in parcels as it becomes ready, said Roxanne Yonn, a public affairs manager for URS Corporation in Sacramento. The architectural, construction and engineering firm has been involved in numerous base clean ups and turn overs.

"Getting those gates down as soon as possible is always a good idea," Yonn said. "Don't let it look like it's dying when the military moves out. A tumbleweed town is a hard image to come back from."

She has a warning: "Strong leadership is needed. Watch out for the vultures. They'll be circling."

Hampton's mayor says he won't speculate public l y on the future yet. Kearney did, say, however, that if Fort Monroe goes, it could be like "a daughter getting married.

"There's that disappointment that you lose her," he said, "but maybe we're gaining a son and a whole new family, and we're just not aware of it yet."

* Reach Joanne Kimberlin at (757) 446-2338 or joanne.kimberlin@ pilotonline.com.

{DOUBLE-EDIT} THE PENTAGON'S PROPOSAL

More coverage on the base recommendations. A14-A15

ONLINE: Should Fort Monroe be closed? Vote in a poll and join a discussion at pilotonline.com. {CAPTION} BILL TIERNAN/THE VIRGINIAN-PILOT

The recommended closure of Fort Monroe in Hampton could be a boon for Virginia. Fort Monroe's 570-acre property was only loaned to the federal government. If it's closed, it would eventually be returned to Virginia. The Army base's land could then be sold to developers, who would have to abide by preservation guidelines. Fort Monroe is listed as a National Historic Landmark.