Sub base isn't only post Connecticut may lose
May 17, 2005
Bulletin, The (Norwich, CT)
Author: Norwich Bulletin; Ray Hackett; Staff
Page: A4
Section: Local
418 Words

WASHINGTON - While the initial focus of the state has been on the Groton Submarine Base, it is not the only military facility in Connecticut targeted in this round of the Base Realignment and Closure process.

Three of the state's nine U.S. Army Reserve Centers also were targeted for closure and the Connecticut Air National Guard's 103rd Fighter Wing was slated for realignment.

Closing the reserve centers in Middletown, New Haven and Fairfield would mean a loss of 56 civilian and military jobs. The potential loss to the Air Guard is 70 civilian jobs - and the wing's 17 aircraft.

"At this point, the Connecticut National Guard is trying to determine and assess what realignment actually means and what the impact will be to the Air Guard and the state," Lt. Col. John Whitford said Monday.

The Pentagon is recommending transferring Connecticut's fleet of A-10 attack jets from Bradley International Airport to Barnes Air Force Base in Westfield, Mass., a decision that would leave Connecticut as one of handful of states with no air mission or aircraft as part of its Guard component.

The fighter wing played a key role in the war in Iraq, flying non-stop flights to provide air cover for advancing ground troops from the onset of the fighting to the end of the major fighting. Not a single plane or member of the wing was lost.

"Why would you want to move an air wing from an airport?" said Rich Harris, spokesman for Gov. M. Jodi Rell. "It just doesn't make a lot of sense."

Harris said it has not been decided who will be designated to fight those portions of the base-closing recommendations. Subase Realignment Coalition Chairman John Markowicz is recommending his group focus its work on saving the base and the state take the lead on the Army and Air Guard issues.

"I think what we can do is provide other engaged parties with the information they would need to take the lead on those issues," he said.

In a letter to BRAC Commission Chairman Anthony Principi, Rell said Markowicz and a designee she will appoint will serve as Connecticut's primary points of contact regarding base-closing issues. Although mentioning the sub base specifically in her letter, she did not specifically address the other recommendations.

Harris said the state has not determined how it will address the Army and Air Guard recommendations. Rell is scheduled to meet with the heads of state agencies Wednesday, including interim National Guard Adjutant General Brig. Gen. Thaddeus Martin.