Team effort aimed at saving base
May 16, 2005
Bulletin, The (Norwich, CT)
Author: Norwich Bulletin; Ray Hackett; Staff
Page: A6
Section: Local
600 Words

NORWICH - The task is simple: Do the math and find the flaw.

When the Groton submarine base was targeted for closure in 1993, the decision was overturned because of flawed numbers in the Pentagon's rationale. It is the immediate strategy local officials will use again.

In order to convince the nine-member Base Realignment and Closure Commission to remove the Groton base from the list, local officials will have to convince commissioners the decision to close the facility "substantially deviates" from the prescribed criteria and Force Structure Plan.

Over the weekend, members of the Subase Realignment Coalition began the tedious process of analyzing the Pentagon's data accompanying the initial list of base closings. It is the critical first step in mounting an offensive to reverse the decision and keep Groton as the Submarine Capital of the World.

Here's a look at the key players and the task at hand.

Military value

Four of the eight criteria used in developing the base closure list involve military value. Essentially, the Pentagon sought to identify those bases that provide the greatest value to meet future threats.

*John Markowicz and Bill Moore: Markowicz, chairman of the Subase Realignment Coalition, and Moore, former president of the Southeastern Connecticut Chamber of Commerce, were instrumental in the 1993 BRAC in identifying flawed reasoning in that decision. Based on available data, they have already developed the military value of the Groton sub base and will be primarily responsible for analyzing the Pentagon data related to the Groton facility.

*Mick O'Beirne: Another key player in the 1993 BRAC, O'Beirne is a retired Navy veteran who served in a command position at Kings Bay, Ga. Both the sub school and part of the Groton sub fleet are slated for reassignment to Kings Bay. O'Beirne will be responsible for analyzing the Pentagon's data as it relates to that facility.

*Denny Hicks: A retired Navy submariner, Hicks held a command position at the Norfolk naval base in Virginia, where the remainder of the Groton sub fleet is scheduled to be reassigned, along with the consolidation of the Northeast Regional Navy Headquarters with the Atlantic Fleet's Headquarters based in Norfolk. Hicks will have the primary task of reviewing the Pentagon data as it relates to Norfolk.

Cost savings

The Pentagon estimates it will cost $680 million to close the Groton facility, resulting in a $1.6 billion saving over 20 years. The task of disputing those numbers will likely fall largely to the state's congressional delegation.

*Staff members of Democratic Sens. Christopher J. Dodd and Joseph Lieberman and U.S. Rep. Rob Simmons, R-2nd District, will examine the Pentagon's estimates, looking for errors in saving estimates. The federal Government Accounting Office is scheduled to release an independent audit of the estimated cost savings in July. Specifically, environmental clean up costs will be closely scrutinized. There are a number of EPA Superfund sites at the base that could increase the estimated cost of closing the base and reduce the overall cost savings. Additionally, close examination will be given to recent improvements at the base in the hopes of finding flaws that might further reduce estimated savings.

Economic impact

Although not a primary criteria, it is one of the eight considerations the Pentagon was to use in developing its list. Local officials will attempt to identify Pentagon data that significantly underestimates the economic impact.

*Gov. M. Jodi Rell will assemble a "strike force" of state agency representatives and business leaders to find flaws in the Pentagon estimates. The strike force will develop a more comprehensive economic impact study that likely would show a greater economic impact than that of the Pentagon's.