BUSINESSES NEAR FORT LEE WELCOME PENTAGON PLAN - RESIDENTS HOPEFUL THAT JOBS WOULD BE CREATED BY INFLUX OF PERSONNEL
May 15, 2005
Richmond Times-Dispatch (VA)
Author: Andrew PriceTimes-Dispatch Staff Writer Contact Andrew Price at (804) 524-9725 oraprice@timesdispatch.com
Page: A-8
Section: Area/State
668 Words

The Prince George Comfort Inn, a half-mile from Fort Lee's main gate, relies on the military for 50 percent to 90 percent of its business.

As the closest hotel to the installation, it has a steady stream of visiting instructors and graduation guests, said general manager Traci Hackley.

"With any of us up and down the Tri-Cities, we all do house a lot of military," Hackley said. "But at the same time, we don't put all of our eggs in the same basket."

That basket is likely to get bigger -- as are the hopes and dreams of local business owners -- after the Pentagon announced last week that it intends to move thousands more soldiers and civilians to Fort Lee.

On Friday, the Defense Department released the latest round of proposals from the Base Realignment and Closure Commission (BRAC). The moves are intended to consolidate military operations in the U.S. and save $49 billion over 20 years.

The commission proposed that 7,344 personnel -- about 6,500 of them military and the rest civilians -- be relocated to Fort Lee, an Army training and logistics base nestled in the heart of the Tri-Cities.

"We welcome them with open arms and will work with any resources to assist with the transition," Petersburg Mayor Annie M. Mickens said.

"Everyone has to be pleased that the value of Fort Lee has been recognized," she added.

U.S. Rep. J. Randy Forbes, R-4th, whose district includes the military installation, agreed.

"The real victory [Friday] is not in the BRAC list," he said. "It is in the future of Fort Lee."

Recent studies show that Fort Lee contributes $860 million annually to the economies of the Tri-Cities and metro Richmond areas. In addition to those employed at the base, the installation supports 9,300 regional jobs with an annual payroll of $302.3 million.

New construction would cost $600 million, greatly increasing the base's economic impact, said Fort Lee's garrison commander, Col. John Angevine.

"Fort Lee is an economic engine in the region," said Angevine, who foresees an increase in the demand for housing, jobs and business.

Several local residents expressed hope that new jobs would be created from the realignment.

"It's what the city and area needs," Herman Jones said outside a Ukrop's supermarket on South Crater Road in Petersburg. "More job opportunities for young people."

Forbes said the proposal would also create 4,425 indirect non-governmental base support and service industry jobs.

At the Food Lion grocery store across the street from the Comfort Inn on state Route 36, store manager Janet Weaver sees military personnel every day.

While the store's existence doesn't hinge entirely on Fort Lee, it would still reap the benefits of additional personnel.

"I would hope it would increase business by about 10 percent," she said.

Chang Oh, manager of U.S. Dry Cleaners, on Route 36 between downtown Petersburg and Fort Lee, said more than half of his business comes from the military.

The additional personnel will "help everyone," he said.

Although the news from the BRAC report is welcome throughout the Tri-Cities, the real celebration will take place if the changes become official.

"Nothing is final until the list is evaluated, but we're still pretty confident," Mickens said.

The recommendations will go through a procedure that could involve substantial revisions before President Bush acts on them and sends them to Congress for approval. Total state figure: -1,574

1. Fort Lee: +7,344

2. Fort Belvoir: +11,858

3. Fort Monroe: -3,564

4. Fort Eustis: -2,152

5. Norfolk Naval Shipyard (Portsmouth) +2,036

6. Norfolk Naval Station: +2,807

7. Naval Medical Center Portsmouth: -461

8. Naval Surface Warfare Center Dahlgren: -351

9. Naval Weapons Station, Yorktown: -179

10. Defense Supply Center Richmond: +6

Leased space: -22,925

(Military offices in commercial space, many of them in Northern Virginia).