Lackland shift's cost more than just jobs
May 25, 2005
San Antonio Express-News (TX)
Author: L.A. Lorek; EXPRESS-NEWS BUSINESS WRITER
Page: 01E
Section: Business
324 Words

The loss of a military organization at Lackland AFB known as the Cryptologic Support Group is greater than just the number of jobs involved, local technology officials said.

The recent report from the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission, known as BRAC, recommended relocating the center to Tobyhanna Army Depot in Pennsylvania.

The move would cost 177 direct jobs and 199 indirect jobs, and those include many high-tech experts with advanced degrees. Workers with the Cryptologic Support Center repair and maintain computers, electronic components, radios and other equipment.

''Even though those jobs may be relatively small in comparison to other considerations, the intellectual capital of those jobs has a multiple effect,'' said Randy Goldsmith, president of the San Antonio Technology Accelerator Initiative, a public and private technology booster group.

The loss of the group would be a blow to San Antonio's growing intelligence community, which is home to the Air Intelligence Agency at Lackland and the new campus of the National Security Agency, Goldsmith said. The Cryptologic Support Group works closely with the Air Intelligence Agency.

''We're going to have to do more analysis on what their rationale is,'' said retired Air Force Brig. Gen. John Jernigan, who heads San Antonio's military missions task force. ''It's not huge, but it's a large enough number of people that if there's a counterargument, we want to make it.''

In a global sense, San Antonio is ''pretty happy'' with the BRAC list, Jernigan said.

Overall, the report proposes 68 realignments at the city's four military bases, involving the loss of anywhere from 10 jobs to thousands at Wilford Hall Medical Center.

''We're going to have to pick our battles pretty carefully,'' he said.

A Lackland spokesman said no one was available to comment on the move Tuesday.

The report estimates relocating the center would cost the Defense Department $10.2 million initially, but the military would save $28 million by consolidating the operations during the next 20 years.